Employ Modern Trends: GraphQL, Gatsby, Vite, Next.js, MUI (#5733)
DevExpress/devextreme-documentation: concepts/Common/Integration Guides/50 Use MUI components in your DevExtreme application/50 Use MUI components in your DevExtreme application.md

# Use MUI components in DevExtreme apps

MUI is a popular line of React components and design tools. The design of MUI components follows Google's Material Design guidelines. Most MUI products are open-source, and do not require a commercial license.

You don't have to use MUI to add a Material Design look and feel to your application. The DevExtreme library includes [a range of  Material Design themes](https://devexpress.github.io/ThemeBuilder/master/material/blue-light). However, if you want to use both MUI components and DevExtreme components, you can.

You don't need extra configuration to run MUI components side by side with DevExtreme components. But if you nest components from different frameworks, you have to understand how they interact with one another.

## Run the sample application

> The DevExtreme team created a single-page, ready-to-run Vite application that illustrates two common use cases. It contains an MUI component with DevExtreme children, and a DevExtreme component with MUI children. You can view the application's source code in the following GitHub repository: [https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DevExtreme team created a single-page, ready-to-run Vite application that illustrates two common use cases. It contains an MUI component with DevExtreme children, and a DevExtreme component with MUI children. You can view the application's source code in the following GitHub repository: [https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration).
```

Add a button with #includes instead of a link

### Form context and hooks

The `FormControl` MUI component is simple in comparison to its DevExtreme counterpart. Its purpose is to keep track of the form state. Inputs and labels can access this data with the `useFormControlContext` hook.

Since DX inputs do not have access to the `useFormControlContext` hook out of the box, we need to create a wrapper function:

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->
    // In accordance with MUI conventions, do not capitalize the name of the wrapper function
    const dX_MUI_Form_Wrapper_HOC = (DXComponent: any, componentName: keyof FormData) => (props: any) => { 
        const { onValueChange, ...restProps } = props;
        const value = useFormControlContext()?.value as FormData;
        return <DXComponent value={value[componentName]} onValueChange={onValueChange} {...restProps}></DXComponent>
    }

And wrap both of our non-MUI inputs:

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->
    const DXTextBoxWrapper = dX_MUI_Form_Wrapper_HOC(DXTextBox, 'textBox')
    const DXCheckBoxWrapper = dX_MUI_Form_Wrapper_HOC(DXCheckBox, 'checkBox')

### State management

> React.js developers recommend the use of [controlled state management mode](https://reactjs.org/docs/forms.html#controlled-components) for web forms.

Reviewer: Do you think we need a link for an old React documentation? I just recently removed all the links to this website from our docs. Please reconsider the usage of this link.

        },
        success: {
        dark: '#009688',
        },
        error: {
        main: '#FF6666'
        }
    },
    });

Enclose the content of the page in the `ThemeProvider` tag to apply the theme:

    <!--tab: App.tsx-->
    <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
    <MUIFormDxEditors />
    ...
    </ThemeProvider>

### Styling Non-MUI components

Non-MUI components do not automatically gain access to the `sx` styling prop. Use the `unstable_styleFunctionSx` utility to create a wrapper for the DxButton component:

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->
    import { useTheme } from 'styled-components';
    import { unstable_styleFunctionSx, SxProps, styled, Theme }from '@mui/system';
    interface DivProps {
        sx?: SxProps;
    }
    const DxButtonSxWrapped = styled(DxButton)<DivProps>( unstable_styleFunctionSx,);

Now we can retrieve the global MUI theme and style the button: 

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->
    const theme = useTheme() as Theme;
    <DxButtonSxWrapped sx={{
        'backgroundColor': theme.palette.error.main,
        'color': theme.palette.text.secondary
    }} text="Reset Form" onClick={handleReset} 
    />

> This technique is useful if your MUI theme includes settings that DevExtreme themes cannot store --- for example, font-related settings. An easier way to style DevExtreme components nested within MUI components is to simply use DevExtreme themes. Open the [DevExtreme theme builder](https://devexpress.github.io/ThemeBuilder/), define the same color palette as the MUI theme, and reference the DevExtreme theme in your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique is useful if your MUI theme includes settings that DevExtreme themes cannot store --- for example, font-related settings. An easier way to style DevExtreme components nested within MUI components is to simply use DevExtreme themes. Open the [DevExtreme ThemeBuilder](https://devexpress.github.io/ThemeBuilder/), define the same color palette as the MUI theme, and reference the DevExtreme theme in your application.
```

## MUI components inside DevExtreme components

You can utilize a similar strategy to use MUI controls inside a DevExtreme component.

Create functions that handle form state change:

    <!--tab: DX-Form-with-MUI-editors.tsx-->
    const [formData, updateFormData] = useState<FormData>({
        textBox: '',
        muiInput: '',
        checkBox: false
    });
    const handleFormDataChange = (name: string) => (value: string | boolean | null) => {
        updateFormData({ ...formData, [name]: value });
    }
    const handleMuiFormDataChange = (name: string) => (event: React.ChangeEvent<HTMLInputElement>) => {
        updateFormData({ ...formData, [name]: event.target.value });
    }

Create a wrapper for MUI inputs that triggers these functions:

    <!--tab: DX-Form-with-MUI-editors.tsx-->
    const InputTemplate = () => {
        return <MUIInput onChange={handleMuiFormDataChange('muiInput')} />;
    }

> Use the [render()](https://js.devexpress.com/React/Documentation/Guide/React_Components/Component_Configuration_Syntax/#Markup_Customization/Using_a_Rendering_Function) method to wrap MUI components inside `DXItem` and `DXLabel`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [render()](/Documentation/Guide/React_Components/Component_Configuration_Syntax/#Markup_Customization/Using_a_Rendering_Function) method to wrap MUI components inside `DXItem` and `DXLabel`.
```

# Use MUI components in DevExtreme apps

MUI is a popular line of React components and design tools. The design of MUI components follows Google's Material Design guidelines. Most MUI products are open-source, and do not require a commercial license.

You don't have to use MUI to add a Material Design look and feel to your application. The DevExtreme library includes [a range of  Material Design themes](https://devexpress.github.io/ThemeBuilder/master/material/blue-light). However, if you want to use both MUI components and DevExtreme components, you can.

You don't need extra configuration to run MUI components side by side with DevExtreme components. But if you nest components from different frameworks, you have to understand how they interact with one another.

> - [Run the sample application](#run-the-sample-application)

Reviewer 2: You have broken links here. If you want to create TOC, do it as in the following PR: [!5861](https://github.com/DevExpress/devextreme-documentation/pull/5861/files)

- [DevExtreme components inside MUI components](#devextreme-components-inside-mui-components)
        - [Form context and hooks](#form-context-and-hooks)
        - [State management](#state-management)
        - [Handle button presses](#handle-button-presses)
        - [Create and apply the MUI theme](#create-and-apply-the-mui-theme)
        - [Styling Non-MUI components](#styling-non-mui-components)
- [MUI components inside DevExtreme components](#mui-components-inside-devextreme-components)

## Run the sample application

> The DevExtreme team created a single-page, ready-to-run Vite application that illustrates two common use cases. It contains a MUI component with DevExtreme children, and a DevExtreme component with MUI children. You can view the application's source code in the following GitHub repository: [https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The DevExtreme team created a single-page, ready-to-run Vite application that illustrates two common use cases. It contains an MUI component with DevExtreme children, and a DevExtreme component with MUI children. You can view the application's source code in the following GitHub repository: [https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration](https://github.com/DevExpress-Examples/devextreme-mui-integration).
```

Install the dependencies and run the app:

    npm i; npm run dev

![Sample application example](/images/MUI/sample-app.png)

## DevExtreme components inside MUI components

> The `src/MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx` file contains a MUI form with DevExtreme inputs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `src/MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx` file contains an MUI form with DevExtreme inputs.
```

### Form context and hooks

> The `FormControl` MUI component is simple in comparison with its DevExtreme counterpart. Its purpose is to keep track of form state. Inputs and labels can access this data with the `useFormControlContext` hook.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `FormControl` MUI component is simple in comparison to its DevExtreme counterpart. Its purpose is to keep track of the form state. Inputs and labels can access this data with the `useFormControlContext` hook.
```

Since DX inputs do not have access to the `useFormControlContext` hook out of the box, we need to create a wrapper function:

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->

>     // In accordance with MUI conventions, we should not capitalize the name of the wrapper function

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // In accordance with MUI conventions, do not capitalize the name of the wrapper function
```

        },
        success: {
        dark: '#009688',
        },
        error: {
        main: '#FF6666'
        }
    },
    });

Enclose the content of the page in the `ThemeProvider` tag to apply the theme:

    <!--tab: App.tsx-->
    <ThemeProvider theme={theme}>
    <MUIFormDxEditors />
    ...
    </ThemeProvider>

### Styling Non-MUI components

Non-MUI components do not automatically gain access to the `sx` styling prop. Use the `unstable_styleFunctionSx` utility to create a wrapper for the DxButton component:

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->
    import { useTheme } from 'styled-components';
    import { unstable_styleFunctionSx, SxProps, styled, Theme }from '@mui/system';
    interface DivProps {
        sx?: SxProps;
    }
    const DxButtonSxWrapped = styled(DxButton)<DivProps>( unstable_styleFunctionSx,);

Now we can retrieve the global MUI theme and style the button: 

    <!--tab: MUI-Form-with-DX-editors.tsx-->
    const theme = useTheme() as Theme;
    <DxButtonSxWrapped sx={{
        'backgroundColor': theme.palette.error.main,
        'color': theme.palette.text.secondary
    }} text="Reset Form" onClick={handleReset} 
    />

> This approach is useful if your MUI theme includes settings that DevExtreme themes cannot store --- for example, font-related settings. The easier way to style DevExtreme components nested within MUI components is to simply use DevExtreme themes. Open the [DevExtreme theme builder](https://devexpress.github.io/ThemeBuilder/), define the same color palette as the MUI theme, and reference the DevExtreme theme in your application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This technique is useful if your MUI theme includes settings that DevExtreme themes cannot store --- for example, font-related settings. An easier way to style DevExtreme components nested within MUI components is to use DevExtreme themes. Open the [DevExtreme theme builder](https://devexpress.github.io/ThemeBuilder/), define the same color palette as the MUI theme, and reference the DevExtreme theme in your application.
```

## MUI components inside DevExtreme components

> To use MUI controls inside a DevExtreme components, we need to apply a similar strategy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can utilize a similar strategy to use MUI controls inside a DevExtreme component.
```

Create functions that handle form state change:

    <!--tab: DX-Form-with-MUI-editors.tsx>
    const [formData, updateFormData] = useState<FormData>({
        textBox: '',
        muiInput: '',
        checkBox: false
    });
    const handleFormDataChange = (name: string) => (value: string | boolean | null) => {
        updateFormData({ ...formData, [name]: value });
    }
    const handleMuiFormDataChange = (name: string) => (event: React.ChangeEvent<HTMLInputElement>) => {
        updateFormData({ ...formData, [name]: event.target.value });
    }

Create a wrapper for MUI inputs that triggers these functions:

    <!--tab: DX-Form-with-MUI-editors.tsx>
    const InputTemplate = () => {
        return <MUIInput onChange={handleMuiFormDataChange('muiInput')} />;
    }

> Wrap form elements inside `DXItem` and `DXLabel` components. Call the [render()](https://js.devexpress.com/React/Documentation/Guide/React_Components/Component_Configuration_Syntax/#Markup_Customization/Using_a_Rendering_Function) method to render MUI components.

Reviewer 3: I'd like to ask about the flow of these two sentences. How does the second sentence relate to the first?
